# SC18: Does that Stand for “Software Conference”?

#### Contributed by [David Bernholdt](https://github.com/bernhold "David Bernholdt GitHub Profile")

#### Publication date: November 8, 2018

Recent conferences in the Supercomputing series have included a growing number
of events related to software development. Celebrate by participating in these
events. And let’s make sure there are even more next year!

### My Early Experiences at Supercomputing

I attended my first Supercomputing in 1993 as a postdoc in computational
chemistry. It was a celebration of the high-end hardware, which was very
relevant to my work. But the technical program at that time didn’t hold so much
interest for me as a chemist. For a long time, I wasn’t motivated to return to
the annual conference.

By the year 2000, I’d changed jobs a couple of times, and I’d shifted my
research program to focus on computer science, including many issues around
software environments and software development – motivated in part by my
experiences in computational chemistry. I started attending Supercomputing
again. The conference was still a celebration of high-end hardware, but the
technical program had expanded —both broadening and deepening. And it started to
become more relevant to my personal research activities. I was part of a
multi-institutional project to develop component-based software development
approaches for high-performance scientific computing. We offered tutorials for
many years, and once Supercomputing added workshops to its program, we brought
an international workshop series we’d started for this community to
Supercomputing. But apart from that, I didn’t see too many opportunities at a
typical Supercomputing to discuss the practice and experience of the development
computational science and engineering software for high-end computers.

### Supercomputing Today

Since 2000, I’ve attended every Supercomputing conference but one. And over
time, I’ve seen significant growth in the role that *software* plays in the
conference. Next week, SC18 will convene in Dallas, Texas, and the [roster of
software-related events](https://bssw.io/events/sc18-software-related-events) at
this year’s edition of the conference is extensive. There are workshops on
reproducibility and correctness, as well as on training and education in HPC –
particularly important since there is so little formal training available in
software development practices for computational scientists and engineers, as
well as keynotes on software sustainability and development practices at two
other workshops There is a tutorial on producing Better Scientific Software, and
one on Spack, a next-generation package management tool designed with the
special environment and needs of typical supercomputers in mind. And there’s a
panel discussion on Sustaining Research Software. There are also a number of
BOFs related to *software*. BOF stands for Birds of a Feather, and in my
experience, they are almost unique to Supercomputing. They are really just
opportunities to gather communities of interest for discussions in a format
defined by the organizers. But when you have 12,000+ people at a conference,
there are a lot of things to discuss! This year, there are BOFs on for the Spack
community, and U.S. national research infrastructure for computing. But more
significant to me is the BOF on Software Engineering and Reuse for Computational
Science and Engineering, which will be the fourth installment at Supercomputing,
and a spin-off BOF on Research Software Engineering, a name which is gaining
acceptance around the world for the community of people who invest their careers
in the development of research software. To me, the acceptance and high levels
of participation we’ve seen in these events over the last couple of years is an
indication of the growing recognition of *software* as an important topic to the
Supercomputing community.

So if you think software development, productivity, and sustainability are
important issues (and if you’re reading this blog, chances are you do), then I
encourage you to join us at these events at SC18! Your participation is not only
a chance to find like-minded people to discuss and exchange experiences, but it
is also a statement to the organizers of Supercomputing that you value events on
*software.* Which helps pave the way for even more of them in the future.

### Bringing More *Software* into More Conferences

And, speaking of the future, there are also many opportunities for you to get
involved and help *create* that future where there are many venues to discuss
software development experiences, on par with the scientific results and the big
iron on which they were obtained. The Supercomputing conference series is
fundamentally defined by what the community submits – not only papers and
posters, but also proposals for workshops, tutorials, BOFs, panels, and other
types of events. It can be competitive, so not every proposal will be accepted.
But with persistence, I think we have the opportunity to make SC into even more
of a Software Conference than it is already.

But remember too that Supercomputing is not the only venue that provides
significant opportunities for the community to shape the meeting, beyond the
traditional paper and poster submissions. ISC High Performance, the European
counterpart to Supercomputing, offers many of the same types of events as SC and
has submission deadlines coming up in the November-February time frame
(depending on the type of event). SIAM conferences are traditionally very
participatory, with opportunities to organize minisymposia and topical poster
sessions. You may have noticed previously on the [BSSw
Events](https://bssw.io/events) page, events listed for the Computational
Science and Engineering 2017 (CSE17) and Parallel Processing 2018 (PP18)
conferences, as well as a call for posters (now closed) for CSE19, coming this
February. The Platform for Advanced Scientific Computing (PASC) conference
series also includes the opportunity to organize minisymposia, with submission
deadlines in the December-January time frame. And many other conferences offer
opportunities for companion tutorials and workshops. The long-standing [Software
Engineering for Science
(SE4Science)](https://bssw.io/resources/software-engineering-for-science-se4science)
workshop series has been associated with the International Conference on
Software Engineering for many years, and in the past also with Supercomputing.
The [International Workshop on Sustainable Software for Science: Practice and
Experiences (WSSSPE)
series](https://bssw.io/resources/working-towards-sustainable-software-for-science-practice-and-experiences-wssspe),
for example, has co-located variously with Supercomputing, SciPy, Gateway
Community Environments, the RSE Conference, and eScience.

Maybe in time, by working together, we can ensure that discussions about
*software* are a prominent part of all of the technical conferences that we care
about.

**See you in Dallas!**

<!---
Publish: preview
RSS update: 2018-11-08
Categories: Collaboration
Topics: projects and organizations
Tags: bssw-blog-article
Level: 2
Prerequisites: default
Aggregate: none
--->
